---
layout: post
title: An Interesting Exercise in Measure Theory
created: '2026-01-29'
categories:
- Mathematics
tags:
- mathematics
- analysis
description: The solution to Exercise 2A, Problem 8 and 9, in Measure, Integration
  & Real Analysis.
math: true
date: 2026-01-29 22:42 +0800
---
The LaTeX version of this blog post is available [here](https://github.com/melonTree68/blog-posts-latex). Or you can simply download the [.tex](/assets/img/posts/mira-ex2a-9/mira-ex2a-9-blog.tex) and [.pdf](/assets/img/posts/mira-ex2a-9/mira-ex2a-9-blog.pdf) files from here. The content is the same, but the LaTeX version has a more formal typesetting, which I personally prefer (quite much).

This article is the solution (sketch) to Exercise 2A, Problem 8 and 9, in Sheldon Axler's textbook _Measure, Integration & Real Analysis_. Both problems look quite intuitive, but they are not that easy to prove. The solutions below are sometimes sketchy, in order to emphasize the general idea behind.

## Notations

In this article, we adopt the following notations.

- $\ell(\cdot)$ denotes the length of an open interval. (The interval must be open!)

- $\abs A$ denotes the (Lebesgue) outer measure of $A\subseteq\R$. It is defined as

$$
\abs A=\inf\cbra{\sum_{k=1}^\infty\ell(I_k):\{I_k\}\text{ is a sequence of open intervals with }A\subseteq\bigcup_{k=1}^\infty I_k}
$$


## Exercise 2A, Problem 8

{% capture thm_content %}
For any $A\subseteq\R$ and any bounded open interval $I$,

$$
\abs A=\abs{A\cap I}+\abs{A\cap I^c}.
$$
{% endcapture %}
{% include thms/theorem.html type="Lemma" title="Exercise 2A, Problem 8" content=thm_content %}


{% capture pf_content %}
$A=(A\cap I)\cup(A\cap I^c)\implies\text{LHS}\le\text{RHS}$. Assume that $\text{LHS}<\text{RHS}$, i.e., $\exists\\\{I_k\\\}$ s.t.
    
$$
A\subseteq\bigcup_{k=1}^\infty I_k,\quad \sum_{k=1}^\infty\ell(I_k)<\abs{A\cap I}+\abs{A\cap I^c}.
$$


Split each $I_k$ into one open interval inside $I$, collected in a new $\\\{I_k\\\}$, and two open intervals outside $I$, collected in $\\\{J_k\\\}$. Then
\begin{equation}\label{eq1}
    A\backslash\\{a,b\\}\subseteq\bra{\bigcup_{k=1}^\infty I_k}\cup\bra{\bigcup_{k=1}^\infty J_k},\quad I_k\in I,J_k\in I^c.
\end{equation}
\begin{equation}\label{eq2}
    \sum_{k=1}^\infty\ell(I_k)+\sum_{k=1}^\infty\ell(J_k)<\abs{A\cap I}+\abs{A\cap I^c}.
\end{equation}
Add $(a-\varepsilon,a+\varepsilon)$ and $(b-\varepsilon,b+\varepsilon)$ to $\\\{J_k\\\}$. (\ref{eq1}) becomes
\begin{equation}\label{eq3}
    A\subseteq\bra{\bigcup_{k=1}^\infty I_k}\cup\bra{\bigcup_{k=1}^\infty J_k},
\end{equation}
and $\varepsilon$ is small enough s.t. (\ref{eq2}) still holds.

Analyze (\ref{eq1}) and (\ref{eq3}). We have
    
$$
A\cap I\subseteq\bigcup_{k=1}^\infty I_k,\quad A\cap I^c\subseteq\bigcup_{k=1}^\infty J_k,
$$

contradicting (\ref{eq2}).
{% endcapture %}
{% include thms/proof.html content=pf_content %}


## Exercise 2A, Problem 9

{% capture thm_content %}
Prove that for all $A\subseteq\R$,

$$
\abs A=\lim_{t\to\infty}\abs{A\cap(-t,t)}.
$$
{% endcapture %}
{% include thms/theorem.html type="Problem" title="Exercise 2A, Problem 9" content=thm_content %}


{% capture pf_content %}
The case where $\abs A=0$ is trivial.

Now suppose $\abs A\in\R^+$. Let $\\\{I_k\\\}$ be s.t.
\begin{equation}\label{eq4}
    A\subseteq\bigcup_{k=1}^\infty I_k,
\end{equation}
where each $I_k$ is bounded and

$$
\abs A\le\sum_{k=1}^\infty\ell(I_k)<\abs A+\varepsilon.
$$

Then $\exists n$ s.t.

$$
\sum_{k=1}^n\ell(I_k)>\abs A-\varepsilon.
$$

$\exists t$ s.t. $\bigcup_{k=1}^nI_k\subseteq(-t,t)$. Now by (\ref{eq4}), we have

$$
A\cap(-t,t)^c\subseteq\bigcup_{k=n+1}^\infty I_k.
$$


$$
\abs{A\cap(-t,t)^c}\le\sum_{k=n+1}^\infty\ell(I_k)<(\abs A+\varepsilon)-(\abs A-\varepsilon)=2\varepsilon.
$$


Now suppose $\abs A=\infty$. WLOG, suppose $A\cap\Z=\emptyset$; otherwise consider $A\backslash\Z$ instead of $A$. By repeatedly using the lemma, we can prove that

$$
\abs A=\sum_{n\in\Z}\abs{A\cap(n,n+1)}.
$$

Because $\abs A=\infty$, $\exists m$ s.t.

$$
\sum_{n=-m}^m\abs{A\cap(n,n+1)}>C.
$$

Hence

$$
\abs{A\cap(-m,m)}=\sum_{n=-m}^{m-1}\abs{A\cap(n,n+1)}>C.
$$

Here the first equality follows from repeatedly using the lemma.
{% endcapture %}
{% include thms/proof.html content=pf_content %}
